Akka 2.6.0 release announcement (#645)
akka/akka.github.com: blog/_posts/2019-11-06-akka-2.6.0-released.md

---
layout: post
title: Akka 2.6.0 Released
author: Patrik Nordwall
short: We are excited to announce that Akka 2.6.0 is released
category: news
tags: [releases]
---

Dear hakkers,

Today we are proud to announce the availability of the **final 2.6.0**.

**Highlights of Akka 2.6.0 are new APIs with type-safety for Akka Actors, and better stability for Akka Cluster with Artery and improved serialization.**

> Akka 2.5.0 was [released two and a half years ago](https://akka.io/blog/news/2017/04/13/akka-2.5.0-released), and since then we have published 26 patch releases. So it’s time for a new minor release.

Author: um, we don't have to educate about patch and minor here, thx

The 2.6.0 final binaries are the same as 2.6.0-RC2. We have only updated documentation and added a missing dependency.

## Highlights of Akka 2.6

The key features of the 2.6.0 release are:

* Stable APIs of Akka Typed, see below.
* New default transport for actor messaging, see Artery below.
* Serialization with Jackson, see below.
* Make Akka internals immune against thread starvation issues by using an [internal dispatcher](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/dispatchers.html#internal-dispatcher) for Akka internal actors and tasks.
* Simplify running of Akka Streams with an ActorSystem without creating a Materializer, [see example](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/stream/stream-quickstart.html#first-steps).

> * Propagate cause for Streams cancelation upstreams, which can be used for better error handling in for example Akka HTTP.

Reviewer: upstream maybe read better? even tho there can be multiple upstreams

Author: changed

* Promote APIs marked as [may change](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/common/may-change.html) and [remove deprecated features](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/migration-guide-2.5.x-2.6.x.html#removed-features-that-were-deprecated).

A total of 489 issues were closed since 2.6 development started in April, 2019 (~v2.5.22). The complete list can be found on the milestones on github: [2.6.0-M1](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/140?closed=1), [2.6.0-M2](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/141?closed=1), [2.6.0-M3](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/143?closed=1), [2.6.0-M4](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/144?closed=1), [2.6.0-M5](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/145?closed=1), [2.6.0-M6](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/146?closed=1), [2.6.0-M7](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/148?closed=1), [2.6.0-M8](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/150?closed=1), [2.6.0-RC1](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/151?closed=1), [2.6.0-RC2](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/154?closed=1) and [2.6.0](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/155?closed=1)

### Stable APIs of Akka Typed

> In Akka 2.6, we have finally marked the new typed Actor API ("Akka Typed") as stable. The typed API is now officially the main API for Akka. In the typed API, each actor needs to declares which message type it is able to handle and the type system enforces that only messages of this type can be sent to the actor. We want to say special thanks to [Dr. Roland Kuhn](https://github.com/rkuhn) for the early prototypes of Akka Typed several years ago and for providing valuable input along the way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Akka 2.6, we have finally marked the new typed Actor API ("Akka Typed") as stable. The typed API is now officially the main API for Akka. In the typed API, each actor needs to declare which message type it is able to handle and the type system enforces that only messages of this type can be sent to the actor. We want to say special thanks to [Dr. Roland Kuhn](https://github.com/rkuhn) for the early prototypes of Akka Typed several years ago and for providing valuable input along the way.
```

Akka Typed was declared ready to be used in production a while ago [in Akka 2.5.22](https://akka.io/blog/news/2019/04/10/akka-tyoed-prod-ready). Since then we have polished the APIs further and improved the documentation. With Akka 2.6.0 the APIs
are fully stable, with the same binary compatibility guarantees as with other parts of Akka.

Alongside the classic Actor API, Akka now provides new APIs for all the main modules, such as [Persistence](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/index-persistence.html) and
[Cluster Sharding](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/cluster-sharding.html). While introducing these new APIs we took the opportunity to rework these APIs and have improved the usability experience of all these modules. The goal was to make them more guided for the most common usage without limiting the flexibility to go beyond that.

> It’s important to note that the classic APIs are still fully supported and existing applications can

Reviewer: maybe a note that it is expected that satellite projects such as http and management will continue to use toClassic?

Author: I added a sentence in the Compatibility section instead, see https://github.com/akka/akka.github.com/pull/645/commits/33e41b0a7a70e0511f7b63360e16b3375251bfcf

Artery improves stability for systems using Akka Cluster and also has much better performance.

One thing to be aware of is that rolling update from classic remoting to Artery is not supported since the protocol is completely different. It will require a full cluster shutdown and new startup. Classic remoting is deprecated but can still be used in 2.6.x, for example to support rolling updates until a full shutdown can be performed. See [migration guide](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/migration-guide-2.5.x-2.6.x.html#remoting) for more information.

### Serialization with Jackson

A new [serializer that is using Jackson](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/serialization-jackson.html) is included in Akka. It supports both JSON and binary CBOR formats.

We have recommended against using Java serialization and now it has been disabled by default. Jackson is a good choice in many cases, and our recommendation if you don’t have other preferences or constraints.

## Compatibility

Akka 2.6 is binary backwards compatible with 2.5 with the ordinary [exceptions listed in the documentation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/common/binary-compatibility-rules.html). 

> What we can do in minor releases compared to patch releases are things like change of default configuration and removal of deprecated features. Some configuration changes may be needed when updating, please read the [migration guide](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/migration-guide-2.5.x-2.6.x.html) as a first step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What we can do in minor releases compared to patch releases is changing defaults in the configuration and removing deprecated features. Some configuration changes may be needed when updating, please read the [migration guide](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/migration-guide-2.5.x-2.6.x.html) as a first step.
```

## Highlights of Akka 2.6

The key features of the 2.6.0 release are:

* Stable APIs of Akka Typed, see below.
* New default transport for remote actor messaging, see Artery below.
* Serialization with Jackson, see below.
* Make Akka internals immune against thread starvation issues by using an [internal dispatcher](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/dispatchers.html#internal-dispatcher) for Akka internal actors and tasks.
* Simplify running of Akka Streams with an ActorSystem without creating a Materializer, [see example](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/stream/stream-quickstart.html#first-steps).
* Propagate cause for Streams cancelation upstream, which can be used for better error handling in for example Akka HTTP.
* [Documentation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/index.html) improvements.
* [SLF4J logging API](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/logging.html) in Akka Typed
* Promote APIs marked as [may change](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/common/may-change.html) and [remove deprecated features](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/migration-guide-2.5.x-2.6.x.html#removed-features-that-were-deprecated).

> 

Reviewer 3: There are cluster and friends things to highlight maybe one or two of, but I'm not remembering them to suggest. Seems important to add at least one from sharding or dd.

Author: the only thing I could find was: [Passivation of Cluster Sharding entities](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/cluster-sharding.html#passivation) by default

added that

Reviewer 3: I think now there are many smaller hardening updates but nothing stands out enough to highlight. G2G thanks.

A total of 489 issues were closed since 2.6 development started in April, 2019 (~v2.5.22). The complete list can be found on the milestones on github: [2.6.0-M1](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/140?closed=1), [2.6.0-M2](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/141?closed=1), [2.6.0-M3](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/143?closed=1), [2.6.0-M4](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/144?closed=1), [2.6.0-M5](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/145?closed=1), [2.6.0-M6](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/146?closed=1), [2.6.0-M7](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/148?closed=1), [2.6.0-M8](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/150?closed=1), [2.6.0-RC1](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/151?closed=1), [2.6.0-RC2](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/154?closed=1) and [2.6.0](https://github.com/akka/akka/milestone/155?closed=1)

### Stable APIs of Akka Typed

> In Akka 2.6, we have finally marked the new typed Actor API ("Akka Typed") as stable. The typed API is now officially the main API for Akka. In the typed API, each actor needs to declare which message type it is able to handle and the type system enforces that only messages of this type can be sent to the actor. We want to say special thanks to [Dr. Roland Kuhn](https://github.com/rkuhn) for the early prototypes of Akka Typed several years ago and for providing valuable input along the way.

Reviewer 3: I feel like we should note that it is `the new actor APIs` because we refer to typed this way many times in the docs now.

Author: it starts with: the new typed Actor API ("Akka Typed")

isn't that clear enough?

Reviewer 3: 'the new typed Actor API' => the new Actor API ("Akka Typed") ?

Akka Typed was declared ready to be used in production a while ago [in Akka 2.5.22](https://akka.io/blog/news/2019/04/10/akka-tyoed-prod-ready). Since then we have polished the APIs further and improved the documentation. With Akka 2.6.0 the APIs
are fully stable, with the same binary compatibility guarantees as with other parts of Akka.

Alongside the classic Actor API, Akka now provides new APIs for all the main modules, such as [Persistence](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/index-persistence.html) and

> [Cluster Sharding](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/cluster-sharding.html). While introducing these new APIs we took the opportunity to rework these APIs and have improved the usability experience of all these modules. The goal was to make them more guided for the most common usage without limiting the flexibility to go beyond that.

Reviewer 3: I'd add DD to the `new APIs` list of 2 shown now.

Author: added

It’s important to note that the classic APIs are still fully supported and existing applications can
continue to use the classic APIs. It is currently not planned to deprecate or remove the classic API. For new projects we recommend using the new Actor API. It is possible to [use the new Actor APIs together with classic actors in the same ActorSystem](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/coexisting.html). An existing application doesn’t have to change, but if you like it’s possible to introduce Akka Typed for new functionality or [migrate at your own pace](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/from-classic.html).

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we also link to at least one sample or the examples page where we have migrated to typed 2.6?

Author: added to one of the key features: Improvements to [documentation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/index.html) and [example projects](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/examples.html).

### Serialization with Jackson

A new [serializer that is using Jackson](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/serialization-jackson.html) is included in Akka. It supports both JSON and binary CBOR formats.

We have recommended against using Java serialization and now it has been disabled by default. Jackson is a good choice in many cases, and our recommendation if you don’t have other preferences or constraints.

## Compatibility

Akka 2.6 is binary backwards compatible with 2.5 with the ordinary [exceptions listed in the documentation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/common/binary-compatibility-rules.html). 
What we can do in minor releases compared to patch releases is changing defaults in the configuration and removing deprecated features. Some configuration changes may be needed when updating, please read the [migration guide](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/project/migration-guide-2.5.x-2.6.x.html) as a first step.

Libraries built for Akka 2.5.x can also be used with Akka 2.6.x. For example Akka HTTP 10.1.10 and Akka Management 1.0.4 can be used with Akka 2.6.0 dependencies. You may have to add explicit dependencies to the new Akka version in your build.

> When using Akka extensions in for example Akka HTTP or Akka Management together with an Akka Typed `ActorSystem` it is expected to use the [Typed to Classic adapters](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/coexisting.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using Akka extensions, for example Akka HTTP or Akka Management, together with an Akka Typed `ActorSystem` it is expected to use the [Typed to Classic adapters](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/coexisting.html).
```

* [Akka Enhancements 1.1.12](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-enhancements/current/) has been released to support Akka 2.6.0.
* [Lightbend Telemetry 2.12.1](https://developer.lightbend.com/docs/telemetry/current/home.html) has been updated for Akka 2.6.0, including new instrumentation for Akka Typed.
* [Play](https://www.playframework.com) and [Lagom](https://www.lagomframework.com) for Akka 2.6.0 will follow shortly.

## Credits

For this release, since April 2019 (`f9c3c36`), we had the help of 77 committers – thank you all very much!

```
commits  added  removed
    222  44188    24033 Patrik Nordwall
     94  66338    46304 Christopher Batey
     82  13021    14226 Johan Andrén
     75   3416    14204 Arnout Engelen
     64   7726     4306 Helena Edelson
     20    890     7474 Johannes Rudolph

>      16   4927       42 Scala Steward

Reviewer 4: Maybe drop Scala Steward from here?

Reviewer 3: agree

Author: 👍
